♪
>> NARRATOR: Yemen.
Journalist Safa al Ahmad
has been covering
the devastating war here since
it began four years ago.
Now she's come to investigate a
different conflict:
the escalation of the U.S. fight
against Al Qaeda in Yemen.
There's been little reporting
from the ground
about what the U.S.
is doing here.
But one operation made headlines
two years ago.
>> U.S. forces launched a
surprise raid
in Yemen overnight...
>> ...targeting an Al Qaeda camp
in southern Yemen on Sunday...
>> ...the pre-dawn raid went
wrong almost from the beginning,
leaving a Navy SEAL dead.
>> A highly successful raid that
will lead to many more victories
in the future against our enemy.
>> AHMAD: I was hearing reports
questioning how successful
that mission was,
and I was also hearing about
civilian casualties.
I wanted to go and see for
myself
what had happened that night,
but also what it might reveal
about the larger
counterterrorism operation
that the U.S. were conducting.
(gun fires, explosion roars)
>> NARRATOR: Yemen has been
wracked by a war
between armed factions
since 2014.
(crowd chanting):
On one side: the Houthis,
a group from Northern Yemen
with links to Iran.
Against them: many tribes,
and a coalition including Yemeni
government troops, Saudi Arabia,
and the UAE,
supported by the U.S.
At the same time, the U.S. has
been trying to target
both ISIS and Al Qaeda here.
The Navy SEAL raid in January
2017 was on the village of Yakla
on the front line between
the tribes and the Houthis.
>> AHMAD: Since I heard about
the Yakla raid,
I've been trying for months
to get access to the village.
I finally got a phone call--
I was going to be picked up
by somebody from Yakla village
and be driven there.
Yakla is a very dangerous place
to get to
because it sits in the middle
of several front lines.
You have the Houthis,
you have the tribes,
and you have the Yemeni
government fighting there.
You also have elements
of Al Qaeda,
and so this exposes everyone
to the danger
of U.S. drone strikes.
On the way, the driver stopped
in a clearing
where he told me that this is
where
the American Special Forces
had landed.
They had trekked for seven
kilometers to the village
of Yakla, and so we had retraced
their trip to the village.
(hammering, clattering)
>> NARRATOR:
The Navy SEALs attacked
an Al Qaeda headquarters here,
according to a Pentagon
statement.
The statement said the troops
met resistance,
including from numerous
female fighters.
One American soldier was killed
and three others injured.
The military said they killed at
least 14 Al Qaeda members.
>> AHMAD: I wanted to talk
to the eyewitnesses
that had survived the raid
to hear their narrative about
what happened.
ABDULILLAH AL DAHAB:
>> NARRATOR: Local tribal leader
Sheikh Abdulillah al Dahab
has been in hiding since the
raid
and has not been interviewed
about what happened until now.
DAHAB:
>> NARRATOR: He says his tribe
has been fighting the Houthis
on the side backed
by the United States.
DAHAB:
>> NARRATOR: At 2:00 a.m.,
Abdulillah says
his 11-year-old son Ahmed
was on their roof
and saw armed men approaching.
Thinking they were Houthis,
the boy shouted out.
The sheikh says the commandos
then shot Ahmed
through the heart, and his
family returned fire.
DAHAB:
AHMAD and SINAN:
>> AHMAD: The people of Yakla
told me that at least
seven women and ten children
were killed that night.
The youngest was
a three-month-old.
MILHA AL AMERI:
>> NARRATOR: The Pentagon
acknowledged that civilians,
including children, were likely
killed
in what they called
a "ferocious firefight."
But they said the Navy SEALs had
obtained valuable intelligence
and taken out Al Qaeda leaders--
including two of Abdulillah's
brothers.
The sheikh denies the brothers
had anything to do
with Al Qaeda.
He says one of them,
Abdul Raouf,
was a tribal commander
with the Yemeni army,
the side backed by the U.S.
This was confirmed
to "Frontline"
by the Yemeni government.
DAHAB:
>> NARRATOR: The sheikh
acknowledges
that members of his family have
been connected to Al Qaeda.
>> AHMAD: The Dahab family is
symbolic
of the complexities
of Yemeni politics.
You have people of his family
who did choose to join Al Qaeda.
You have members who did not
and chose to fight them.
>> NARRATOR: The sheikh's
brother-in-law
was Anwar al Awlaki, the
Yemeni-American Al Qaeda leader
who was killed in a drone strike
in 2011.
Al Awlaki's eight-year-old
daughter Nawar,
the sheikh's niece,
was killed in the Yakla raid.
The family said she was shot
in the neck.
>> AHMAD: The members of the
Dahab family that I spoke to
told me they had paid a really
high price
just because they were part
of the Dahab family.
>> NARRATOR: The villagers say
around 30 civilians were killed.
Most are buried in this
cemetery.
Department of Defense
investigations later concluded
that there were between four
and 12 civilian casualties
and and around 35 enemy
combatants killed.
They would not comment
on the Sheikh's brothers,
and told "Frontline" they
maintain "a firm commitment
to protecting civilians."
♪
The Yakla raid marked
the beginning
of a dramatic escalation
of the U.S.'s ongoing war
against Al Qaeda in Yemen.
During President Obama's
eight years in office,
the U.S. carried out an
estimated 154 drone strikes
in Yemen.
In President Trump's
first two years,
around 176 have been reported.
>> A priority is the fight
against Al Qaeda
in the Arabian Peninsula.
>> This is a franchised Al Qaeda
metastasizing threat.
>> This is the franchise of
Al Qaeda that has demonstrated
the ability to try to attack
our homeland.
>> NARRATOR: The roads leading
out of Yakla
are littered with the wreckage
of cars destroyed
by drone strikes.
>> AHMAD: While I was in Yemen,
I heard about a drone strike
that had just recently happened.
It was in the central region
of Shabwa.
It all started apparently when
a boy had joined
Al Qaeda.
(dog barking, Ahmad and Ali
Salem speaking Arabic)
AHMAD:
>> NARRATOR: Ali Salem is the
uncle of the boy.
He takes Safa to meet him.
For his safety, we agreed not
to show his face.
He says he ran away from home
with friends to join Al Qaeda.
AHMAD:
BOY:
AHMAD and BOY:
♪
>> NARRATOR: Al Qaeda in Yemen
doesn't just preach jihad
against the United States,
but also against the UAE forces,
Saudis, and the Houthis,
all of whom they consider
infidels.
>> AHMAD: The situation in Yemen
is very complex right now.
You have interlocking conflicts
of who is fighting who.
The people on the ground have
told me
that many of these young men
who join Al Qaeda
are joining it for local
reasons,
for local conflicts, and not
necessarily because
they want to join
the global jihad.
>> NARRATOR: According
to villagers in Shabwa,
on January 26, 2018, the boy's
father and some relatives
set out by car to rescue the boy
from Al Qaeda.
While driving,
they came under attack.
BOY:
SALEM:
>> NARRATOR: The family says
seven relatives were killed
in the strike.
SALEM:
>> NARRATOR: Ali is a soldier in
the Yemeni army.
He says the boy's father
was a taxi driver
and two other uncles
who were killed
were also in the Yemeni army.
AHMAD AND SALEM:
>> NARRATOR: Ali Salem prepared
these papers
to clear the names
of his relatives.
He wants the U.S. to pay
compensation for their deaths.
He says he is now
the sole provider
for over 30 family members.
We asked the Pentagon
about the strike
and Ali Salem's account
of the deaths.
But they would not comment
beyond a statement at the time
that a strike had occurred on
that day in Shabwa.
♪
In another part of Yemen, Safa
traveled to the site
of the largest known U.S.
Special Forces ground raid
in the country.
The Pentagon said at the time
that seven terrorists
were killed
with no civilian casualties.
(animal bleating)
>> AHMAD: The raid took place on
a tiny little village
called Athlan on May 23, 2017.
The people who lived in the
village described
an apocalyptic scene--
they were so frightened
about the amount of U.S.
soldiers that were sent.
There were the helicopters,
the drones.
>> NARRATOR: The villagers say
Safa is the first
foreign journalist to come here
since the U.S. raid.
ABU MUJAHID:
AHMAD and MUJAHID:
CHILD:
(Abu Mo'ath speaking Arabic)
MO'ATH:
CHILD:
>> NARRATOR: Eight-year-old
Mujahid's back
and hearing was damaged
in the raid.
MO'ATH and CHILD:
CHILD:
>> NARRATOR: A U.N.
investigation later said
that 50 U.S. soldiers were
involved in the attack,
and that in addition
to the Al Qaeda casualties,
five civilians were killed,
including an 80-year-old man,
Nasser Mahdi.
(wheel squeaking)
Dhabia Ahmed was at home that
night with her six children.
>> AHMED:
>> NARRATOR: She says her
15-year-old son Abdullah
was a conscript
in the Yemeni army.
He was killed that night.
She shows his gun and says that
he was just trying
to defend his family,
and that other men did the same.
In a statement on the incident,
the Pentagon said precision
airstrikes
from an A.C.-130 gunship
were used.
AHMED:
(crying)
>> NARRATOR: The villagers say
the U.S. soldiers withdrew
in a hurry.
They show some things
the Americans left behind.
MO'ATH:
>> AHMAD: While filming
with the Athlan family,
they brought a plastic ladder
that they were struggling
to open.
And they also had
a medical backpack.
Within the backpack were several
laminated papers.
One of the laminated papers
had 22 names on it,
with blood types.
I assume that they were the
names of the special ops guys
that were on that mission.
And it included two dogs.
>> NARRATOR: "Frontline" tracked
down some of the names
on the list, and confirmed
they were Navy SEALs.
To protect their identities,
we're obscuring the names.
The Pentagon wouldn't comment
saying:
"We will not discuss our
tactics, techniques,
and procedures."
Sources with experience in
Special Forces told us
even taking a list of
full names on such a mission
was a grave mistake.
(children chattering)
SINAN:
>> NARRATOR: Back in Yakla,
families say
they still don't understand why
the U.S. attacked their village
two years ago.
SINAN:
>> AHMAD: The Yemenis I've spoke
to in Yakla and Athlan
and Shabwa, all of them
have a common fear,
a fear of something that is
completely out of their control.
The drone strikes, the raids,
adds to the massive fear
and confusion the Yemenis are
already feeling
in the midst of this very
complicated war.
>> NARRATOR: Since the Yakla
raid, there have been several
drone strikes
around the village.
Sheikh Abdulillah's house has
been hit three times;
he says three of his bodyguards
were killed.
He remains in hiding.
DAHAB:
>> Go to pbs.org/frontline
for more
of Safa Al Ahmad's
reporting from Yemen.
>> The human cost of this war on
Yemen is frightening.
>> Then get the latest reporting
on black lung
from our partners at NPR and
stay tuned for a special episode
of our podcast,
"The Frontline Dispatch,"
with NPR about miners
with the disease.
>> It's just like turn your
lungs to concrete.
>> You just stop breathing and
you just wake up... (gasps)
>> Connect to the "Frontline"
community on Facebook,
Twitter, or pbs.org/frontline.
>> ...the violent MS-13 gang
for machete attacks.
>> ...police have uncovered
human remains...
>> If you're an MS-13 gang
member, take a look behind me.
For every person here,
there's ten more.
>> ...a major crackdown...
>> They said, "We're taking
the boy. We're government."
>> We have seen a significant
number of MS-13 gang members
who entered the United States as
unaccompanied minors.
>> Anyone can be labeled and
cause them to be detained,
and their civil rights to be
violated,
and these are children.
♪
>> For more on this and
other "Frontline" programs,
visit our website at
pbs.org/frontline.
♪
"Frontline's"
"Coal's Deadly Dust"
and "Targeting Yemen" are
available
on Amazon Prime Video.
♪